Dihybrid Crosses

Previous

Next

List

[ninja icon]

Understanding:

•  Unlinked genes segregate independently as a result of meiosis

    
According to the law of independent assortment, pairs of alleles are
inherited independently of one another if their gene loci are on
separate chromosomes – these genes are said to be unlinked

-   This is due to the random orientation of homologous pairs during
    metaphase I of meiosis

The independent segregation of unlinked genes results in a greater
number of potential gamete combinations, as well as a greater variety of
possible phenotypes

-   This also results in more complex inheritance patterns (e.g.
    monohybrid versus dihybrid crosses)

Inheritance of a Single Gene versus Two Unlinked Genes

[unlinked gametes]

[ninja icon]

Application:

•  Completion and analysis of Punnett squares for dihybrid traits

    
A dihybrid cross determines the genotypic and phenotypic combinations of
offspring for two particular genes that are unlinked

-   Because there are two genes, each with two alleles, there can be up
    to four different gamete combinations

The easiest way to work out potential gamete combinations in a dihybrid
cross is to use the FOIL method:

-   FOIL = First / Outside / Inside / Last

[FOIL method]

If you are having difficulty remembering the FOIL method, an alternative
way to identify potential gamete combinations in a dihybrid cross is to
remember the claw

The CLAW – Calculating Dihybrid Gamete Combinations

[the claw]

How to Complete a Dihybrid Cross

The inheritance of dihybrid traits can be calculated according to the
following steps:
Step 1:  Designate characters to represent the alleles

-   Capital letter for dominant allele, lower case letter for recessive
    allele

Step 2:  Write down the genotype and phenotype of the parents (P
generation)

-   Always pair alleles from the same gene and always write capitals
    first (e.g. AaBb, not ABab)

Step 3:  Write down all potential gamete combinations for both parents

-   Use the FOIL method (or the claw) to identify all possible
    combinations

Step 4:  Use a Punnett square to work out potential genotypes of
offspring

-   Only include the different gamete combinations for each parent (e.g.
    AaBB has two combinations = AB and aB)

Step 5:  Write out the phenotype ratios of potential offspring

-   Phenotypic ratios reflect mathematical probabilities only and may
    not necessarily reflect actual offspring ratios

Example of a Typical Dihybrid Cross

[dihybrid cross]

[ninja icon]

Skill:

•  Calculation of the predicted genotypic and phenotypic ratio of
offspring of dihybrid crosses involving unlinked 

    autosomal genes

    
Below are two examples of questions involving dihybrid crosses – click
on the question to show / hide the solution

Problem 1:

[question] In sheep, the allele for black wool (B) is dominant over the
allele for white wool (b).
Similarly, the allele for horns (H) is dominant over the allele for
being hornless (h).
Pure breeding horned sheep with black wool were crossed with pure
breeding hornless sheep with white wool.
(a) State the genotype and the phenotype of the F1 individuals produced
as a result of this cross.
(b) Two F1 offspring were mated together. Calculate the expected ratio
of phenotypes in the F2 generation.

[metric system]

Problem 2:

[question] In cats, the allele for grey fur (G) is dominant over the
allele for beige fur (g).
The allele for a solid coat (S) is dominant over the allele for a
striped coat (s).
A pure breeding solid, beige cat is crossed with a pure breeding
striped, grey cat.
(a) State the genotype and the phenotype of the F1 individuals produced
as a result of this cross.
(b) Calculate the phenotypes resulting from a cross between a pure
breeding solid, beige cat and an F1 offspring.

[second]
