Mesocosms

Previous

Next

List

[ninja icon]

Understanding:

•  Ecosystems have the potential to be sustainable over long periods
of time

    
Ecosystems describe the interaction between biotic components (i.e.
communities) and abiotic components (i.e. habitat)

-   They are largely self-contained and have the capacity to be
    self-sustaining over long periods of time

There are three main components required for sustainability in an
ecosystem:

-   Energy availability – light from the sun provides the initial
    energy source for almost all communities
-   Nutrient availability – saprotrophic decomposers ensure the
    constant recycling of inorganic nutrients within an environment
-   Recycling of wastes – certain bacteria can detoxify harmful waste
    byproducts (e.g. denitrifying bacteria such as Nitrosomonas)

[ninja icon]

Skill:

•  Setting up sealed mesocosms to try to establish sustainability

    
Mesocosms are enclosed environments that allow a small part of a natural
environment to be observed under controlled conditions

-   A terrarium is a small transparent container (e.g. glass or plastic)
    in which selected plants (or animals) are kept and observed

Making a Self-Sustaining Terrarium

A terrarium can be created using a glass or plastic bottle with a lid,
according to the following steps:

1.  Building a verdant foundation

-   Add a bottom layer of pebbles, gravel or sand – this layer exists
    for drainage (smaller vessels require thinner rock layers)
-   Add a second thin layer of activated charcoal – this will prevent
    mold and help to aerate the soil
-   Spread a thin cover of sphagnum moss (or use an organic coffee
    filter) to create a barrier between the lower layers and soil
-   The final layer is the pre-moistened growing medium (i.e. potting
    mix)

1.  Selecting the right plants

-   Ideally, choose plants that are both slow growing and thrive in a
    bit of humidity (e.g. most ferns, club moss, etc.)
-   Inspect the plant thoroughly for any signs of disease or insects
    before introducing to the terrarium

1.  Maintaining appropriate conditions

-   Ensure the terrarium is placed in a location that provides a
    continuous source of light
-   Locate the terrarium in a place that does not experience fluctuating
    temperature conditions (i.e. avoid direct sunlight)
-   Do not initially over-water the plants – once the right humidity
    is established, a terrarium can go months without watering
-   Occasional pruning may be required – however, as level of soil
    nutrients decrease, plant growth should slow down

Example of a Self-Sustaining Terrarium

[terrarium]
